---
layout: post
title: " Research 3: Concept and definition of mean and the relationship with frequency. The Markov's inequality."
date:   2018-10-16 14:21:21 +0200
categories:
  - statistics
  - Research
tag:
  - research
---

The mean, also known as expected value is a central tendency of a probability 
distribuon or of the random variable characterized by that distribution. Considering 
distributions we have two cases: discrete and continous distribution. For the 
first case che calculation is
<iframe src="http://mathurl.com/y7kquucu"></iframe> 
for the second case, the mean on continous distribution mean is given by 
<iframe src="http://mathurl.com/y8x68p93"></iframe>
The statistical mean has a wide range of applicability in various types 
of experimentation. This type of calculation eliminates random errors and 
helps to derive a more accurate result than a result derived from a single 
experiment.

There is just one problem that very high and low values in respect of the
majority of values may alterate the expected value and hence it may be not
accurate.


We may want to calculate the mean considering the frequency that a certain 
event may appear several times we can then manipulate the calculation for 
the mean and use the frequency of values to calculate the mean and we get 
<iframe src="http://mathurl.com/y7xsyh42"></iframe>

#### Markov's inequality
The Markov's inequality gives an upper bound for the probability that a 
non-negative function of Random Variable is greater or equal to some costant.
Formally we say
<iframe src="http://mathurl.com/ya2zbdpc"></iframe>
Let's see an example of that:
suppose we sample the average of people in a certain amount of cities and we
get that is 150k, we want the propability that sampling a city, it has 300k
people. With a simple calculation we get that is
<iframe src="http://mathurl.com/yb47p3x9"></iframe>

So in this post we saw the concept and definition of mean, the relationship it has withe frequency and the Markov's inequality theorem and an example of that.
